---
date: 2018-3-7
title: Personal Technology Weaknesses
---

Yesterday, I spent a good amount of time reflecting on my personal strengths and weaknesses. In part, this is motivated by the lovely and insightful book _Quiet_, which discusses some implications and nuances of the introvert-extrovert dynamic. 

I came to the conclusion that I feel proficiently strong at a few very helpful things, and my weaknesses are largely in the higher-order skills which take time and patience to develop post-childhood. For example, among my strong traits are navigation, empathizing, mathematics, writing, neatness, and coordination. Weaknesses include relaxation, thinking with numbers over emotions, impulse management, and prioritization. I am fortunate to have strong low-level abilities which grant me agency in the world, but I need to work hard on executive function.

This introspective analysis was helpful because it illuminated a path forward; I duly Googled how to improve executive function and received a plethora of suggestions. Remove the risks from the environment--if eating candy is a problem, then don't have candy in the house. View deadlines as finish lines--things to look forward to when the job will be done and decisions can be made regarding next steps, instead of looming scary obstacles to be avoided. Count to ten before making decisions in order to consider the experiences of the past and their full consequences...am I comfortable making the tradeoff and living with the future?

Behavior change is hard. These techniques are easy to list, but not the simplest thing to actually go do. And I began wondering, what about my daily routine makes it so difficult to change? Surprisingly, one thing that actually helps me go about my day at all--and largely contributed to my learning process to develop the skills and proficiencies I am proud of--actually makes it harder for me to develop my executive function. That thing is 21st century technology: the internet. 

Why is the internet problematic? Obviously it is not inherently good nor bad (perhaps even good, increasing information flow), but because the information flows at light speed whereas my brain only operates at some fraction thereof, the barrier to posting on Facebook, sending an email, or playing a game of chess is incredibly low. Maybe it's even negative, impelling me to do things more quickly, creating an internal pressure to match the technology's processing speed with my own, to act before thinking.

There is a dissonance that I have observed in my own life regarding social media. I am disgusted by some of the things that others post. I often look back (especially when engagements with my posts are low) and think, "why did I post that? What a dumb idea that was." There is an urge to delete such posts, because they represent failure. It's nice to get the data on how much the world appreciates what I have to say, to tailor my online presence to the audience. However, the whole thing gives me the creeps sometimes. I want to leave these digital networks and delete my account. But I cannot.

A problem with many productivity apps, social media, messaging platforms, and even simple record-keeping tools like Google Calendar is their astonishingly alluring ease of use. This ease allows me to achieve goals which might not otherwise be a priority. Consider email. In the analog world, I might have a pile of letters to sort through and respond to, receipts to file, and packages to open. I might allow myself at least a couple sessions over the course of multiple days to get through all the mail properly. With email, I hold myself to a higher standard: I'm getting through my entire inbox in the next hour. Instead of opening messages, thinking on them, and handwriting replies, I skim the messageg and dash off a response which is sent immediately. 

Many people swear by pencil and paper. They like to journal, do homework problems, and probably read books that they can hold in their hands. It's like an entirely different universe from the keyboard and screen. Over the phone, somebody will share something and we might say "thanks." Over text messagge, for the same content, we might say "thanks, you're the best ever <3." More than five times the word count. Entire conversations occur that otherwise would not exist in the world. Perhaps it's wrong to say these conversations and words are not important, but they may be practically of lower utility, a distraction and a social norm which--in aggregate--makes it more difficult for young adults to learn the Albus Dumbledore choice: "between what is right, and what is easy."

  
